en: add document for optimistic mode sharding merge (#253)
pingcap/docs-dm: en/feature-shard-merge-optimistic.md

---
title: Merge and Replicate Data from Sharded Tables in Optimistic Mode
summary: Learn how DM merges and replicates data from sharded tables in the optimistic mode.
---

# Merge and Replicate Data from Sharded Tables in Optimistic Mode

This document introduces the sharding support feature provided by Data Migration (DM) in the optimistic mode. This feature allows you to merge and replicate the data of tables with the same table schema in the upstream MySQL or MariaDB instances into one same table in the downstream TiDB.

> **Note:**
>
> If you do not have an in-depth understanding of the optimistic mode and its restrictions, it is **NOT** recommended to use this mode. Otherwise, replication interruption or even data inconsistency might occur.

## Background

> DM supports executing DDL statements on sharded tables online, which is called sharding DDL and uses the "pessimistic mode" by default. In this mode, when a DDL statement is executed in an upstream sharded table, data replication of this table is paused until the same DDL statement is executed in all other sharded tables. Only by then this DDL statement is executed in the downstream and data replication resumes. This pessimistic mode guarantees that the data replicated to the downstream is always correct but pauses the data replication, which is bad for making A/B changes in the upstream. In some cases, users might spend a long time executing DDL statements in a single sharded table and change the schemas of other sharded tables only after a period of validation. In the pessimistic mode, these DDL statements block data replication and cause many binlog events to pile up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DM supports executing DDL statements on sharded tables online, which is called sharding DDL, and uses the "pessimistic mode" by default. In this mode, when a DDL statement is executed in an upstream sharded table, data replication of this table is paused until the same DDL statement is executed in all other sharded tables. Only by then this DDL statement is executed in the downstream and data replication resumes.

The pessimistic mode guarantees that the data replicated to the downstream is always correct, but it pauses the data replication, which is bad for making A/B changes in the upstream. In some cases, users might spend a long time executing DDL statements in a single sharded table and change the schemas of other sharded tables only after a period of validation. In the pessimistic mode, these DDL statements block data replication and cause many binlog events to pile up.
```

> Therefore, an "optimistic mode" is needed. In this mode, a DDL statement executed on a sharded table is automatically converted to a statement that is compatible with other sharded tables, and then immediately replicated to the downstream. In this mode, no sharded table is blocked from DML replication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, an "optimistic mode" is needed. In this mode, a DDL statement executed on a sharded table is automatically converted to a statement that is compatible with other sharded tables, and then immediately replicated to the downstream. In this way, the DDL statement does not block any sharded table from executing DML replication.
```

> ## Configuration of optimistic mode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Configuration of the optimistic mode
```

Currently, the following statements are not supported in the optimistic mode:

- `ALTER TABLE table_name ADD COLUMN column_name datatype NOT NULL` (To add a `NOT NULL` column without a default value).
- `ALTER TABLE table_name ADD COLUMN column_name datetime DEFAULT NOW()` (To add a column with a varying value).
- `ALTER TABLE table_name RENAME COLUMN column_1 TO column_2;` (To rename a column).
- `ALTER TABLE table_name RENAME INDEX index_1 TO index_2;` (To rename an index).

In addition, the following restrictions apply to DM, no matter in the optimistic mode or in the pessimistic mode:

- In an incremental replication task, ensure that each sharded table's schema that corresponds to the binlog position at the start of the task is consistent with each other.
- The new table added to a sharding group must have a consistent table schema with that of other members. The `CREATE/RENAME TABLE` statement is forbidden when a batch of DDL statements is being executed.
- `DROP TABLE` or `DROP DATABASE` is not supported.
- The DDL statement that is not supported in TiDB is also not supported in DM.

> - The default value of a newly added column must not contain `current_timestamp`, `rand()`, `uuid()`; otherwise, data consistency between the upstream and the downstream might occur.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The default value of a newly added column must not contain `current_timestamp`, `rand()`, `uuid()`; otherwise, data inconsistency between the upstream and the downstream might occur.
```

## Risks

When you use the optimistic mode for a replication task, a DDL statement is replicated to the downstream immediately. If this mode is misused, data inconsistency between the upstream and the downstream might occur.

### Operations that cause data inconsistency

- The schema of each sharded table is incompatible with each other. For example:

>     - Add a column of the same name to two sharded tables respectively but the columns are of different types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Two columns of the same name are added to two sharded tables respectively, but the columns are of different types.
```

>     - Add a column of the same name to two sharded tables respectively but the columns have different default values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Two columns of the same name are added to two sharded tables respectively, but the columns have different default values.
```

>     - Add a generated column of the same name to two sharded tables respectively but the columns are generated using different indexes.

Reviewer 2: `are generated using different indexes.` does not match `但其生成表达式不同`.

>     - Add a generated column of the same name to two sharded tables respectively but the columns are generated using different indexes.

Author: ```suggestion
    - Add a generated column of the same name to two sharded tables respectively but the columns are generated using different expressions.
```

>     - Add a generated column of the same name to two sharded tables respectively but the columns are generated using different expressions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Two generated columns of the same name are added to two sharded tables respectively, but the columns are generated using different expressions.
```

>     - Add an index of the same name to two sharded tables respectively but the keys are different.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Two indexes of the same name are added to two sharded tables respectively, but the keys are different.
```

>     - Other different table insertions with the same name.

Reviewer 2: `schema` is better than `insertion`.

>     - Other different table insertions with the same name.

Author: ```suggestion
    - Other different table schemas with the same name.
```

- Execute the DDL statement that can corrupt data in the sharded table and then try to roll back.

    For example, drop a column `X` and then add this column back.

### Example

Merge and replicate the following three sharded tables to TiDB:

![optimistic-ddl-fail-example-1](/media/optimistic-ddl-fail-example-1.png)

Add a new column `Age` in `tbl01` and set the default value of the column to `0`:

```sql
ALTER TABLE `tbl01` ADD COLUMN `Age` INT DEFAULT 0;
```

![optimistic-ddl-fail-example-2](/media/optimistic-ddl-fail-example-2.png)

Add a new column `Age` in `tbl00` and set the default value of the column to `-1`:

```sql
ALTER TABLE `tbl00` ADD COLUMN `Age` INT DEFAULT -1;
```

![optimistic-ddl-fail-example-3](/media/optimistic-ddl-fail-example-3.png)

> By then, the `Age` column of `tbl00` is inconsistent because `DEFAULT 0` and `DEFAULT -1` are incompatible with each other. In this situation, DM will report the error but you have to manually fix the data inconsistency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By then, the `Age` column of `tbl00` is inconsistent because `DEFAULT 0` and `DEFAULT -1` are incompatible with each other. In this situation, DM will report the error, but you have to manually fix the data inconsistency.
```

## Implementation principle

> In the optimistic mode, after DM-worker receives the DDL statement from the upstream, it forwards the updated table schema to DM-master. The DM-work tracks the current schema of each sharded table and DM-master merges these schemas into a composite schema that is compatible with DML statements of every sharded table. Then DM-master replicates the corresponding DDL statement to the downstream. DML statements are directly replicated to the downstream.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the optimistic mode, after DM-worker receives the DDL statement from the upstream, it forwards the updated table schema to DM-master. DM-worker tracks the current schema of each sharded table and DM-master merges these schemas into a composite schema that is compatible with DML statements of every sharded table. Then DM-master replicates the corresponding DDL statement to the downstream. DML statements are directly replicated to the downstream.
```

![optimistic-ddl-flow](/media/optimistic-ddl-flow.png)

### Examples

> Assume the upstream MySQL has three sharded tables (`tbl00`, `tbl01`, and `tbl02`). Merge and replicate these sharded table to the `tbl` table in the downstream TiDB. See the following image:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assume the upstream MySQL has three sharded tables (`tbl00`, `tbl01`, and `tbl02`). Merge and replicate these sharded tables to the `tbl` table in the downstream TiDB. See the following image:
```

![optimistic-ddl-example-1](/media/optimistic-ddl-example-1.png)

Add a `Level` column in the upstream:

```sql
ALTER TABLE `tbl00` ADD COLUMN `Level` INT;
```

![optimistic-ddl-example-2](/media/optimistic-ddl-example-2.png)

Then TiDB will receive the DML statement from `tbl00` (with the `Level` column) and the DML statement from the `tbl01` and `tbl02` tables (without the `Level` column).

![optimistic-ddl-example-3](/media/optimistic-ddl-example-3.png)

> The following DM statement can be replicated to the downstream without any modification:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following DML statement can be replicated to the downstream without any modification:
```

```sql
UPDATE `tbl00` SET `Level` = 9 WHERE `ID` = 1;
INSERT INTO `tbl02` (`ID`, `Name`) VALUES (27, 'Tony');
```

![optimistic-ddl-example-4](/media/optimistic-ddl-example-4.png)

Also add a `Level` column in `tbl01`:

```sql
ALTER TABLE `tbl01` ADD COLUMN `Level` INT;
```

![optimistic-ddl-example-5](/media/optimistic-ddl-example-5.png)

At this time, the downstream already have had the same `Level` column, so DM-master performs no operation after comparing the table schemas.

Drop a `Name` column in `tbl01`:

```sql
ALTER TABLE `tbl01` DROP COLUMN `Name`;
```

![optimistic-ddl-example-6](/media/optimistic-ddl-example-6.png)

> Then the downstream will receive the DML statement from `tbl00` and `tbl02` with the `Name` column, so this column is not immediately dropped.

Author: ```suggestion
Then the downstream will receive the DML statements from `tbl00` and `tbl02` with the `Name` column, so this column is not immediately dropped.
```

> ---

Reviewer: Please add this file in TOC.

Author: This file is not in the Chinese TOC. @csuzhangxc Do we need to add `feature-shard-merge-optimistic.md` in TOC?

Reviewer 2: this feature is not stable now, we may add this file to TOC after users required it to use it for a while.

Author: @csuzhangxc So we do not need to add it now?

Reviewer 2: I think no need to add it now.

- If you perform an A/B test, perform the test **ONLY** on one sharded table.
- After the A/B test is finished, migrate only the most direct DDL statement(s) to the final schema. Do not re-execute every right or wrong step of the test.

    For example, if you have executed `ADD COLUMN A INT; DROP COLUMN A; ADD COLUMN A FLOAT;` in a sharded table, you only need to execute `ADD COLUMN A FLOAT` in other sharded tables. You do not need to executed all of the three DDL statements again.

- Observe the status of the DM replication when executing the DDL statement. When an error is reported, you need to determine whether this batch of DDL statements will cause data inconsistency.

Currently, the following statements are not supported in the optimistic mode:

- `ALTER TABLE table_name ADD COLUMN column_name datatype NOT NULL` (To add a `NOT NULL` column without a default value).
- `ALTER TABLE table_name ADD COLUMN column_name datetime DEFAULT NOW()` (To add a column with a varying value).
- `ALTER TABLE table_name RENAME COLUMN column_1 TO column_2;` (To rename a column).
- `ALTER TABLE table_name RENAME INDEX index_1 TO index_2;` (To rename an index).

> In addition, the following restrictions apply to DM, no matter in the optimistic mode or in the pessimistic mode:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, the following restrictions apply to both the optimistic mode and the pessimistic mode:
```

    - Two indexes of the same name are added to two sharded tables respectively, but the keys are different.
    - Other different table schemas with the same name.
- Execute the DDL statement that can corrupt data in the sharded table and then try to roll back.

    For example, drop a column `X` and then add this column back.

### Example

Merge and replicate the following three sharded tables to TiDB:

![optimistic-ddl-fail-example-1](/media/optimistic-ddl-fail-example-1.png)

Add a new column `Age` in `tbl01` and set the default value of the column to `0`:

```sql
ALTER TABLE `tbl01` ADD COLUMN `Age` INT DEFAULT 0;
```

![optimistic-ddl-fail-example-2](/media/optimistic-ddl-fail-example-2.png)

Add a new column `Age` in `tbl00` and set the default value of the column to `-1`:

```sql
ALTER TABLE `tbl00` ADD COLUMN `Age` INT DEFAULT -1;
```

![optimistic-ddl-fail-example-3](/media/optimistic-ddl-fail-example-3.png)

By then, the `Age` column of `tbl00` is inconsistent because `DEFAULT 0` and `DEFAULT -1` are incompatible with each other. In this situation, DM will report the error, but you have to manually fix the data inconsistency.

## Implementation principle

> In the optimistic mode, after DM-worker receives the DDL statement from the upstream, it forwards the updated table schema to DM-master. DM-worker tracks the current schema of each sharded table and DM-master merges these schemas into a composite schema that is compatible with DML statements of every sharded table. Then DM-master replicates the corresponding DDL statement to the downstream. DML statements are directly replicated to the downstream.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the optimistic mode, after DM-worker receives the DDL statement from the upstream, it forwards the updated table schema to DM-master. DM-worker tracks the current schema of each sharded table, and DM-master merges these schemas into a composite schema that is compatible with DML statements of every sharded table. Then DM-master replicates the corresponding DDL statement to the downstream. DML statements are directly replicated to the downstream.
```

INSERT INTO `tbl02` (`ID`, `Name`) VALUES (27, 'Tony');
```

![optimistic-ddl-example-4](/media/optimistic-ddl-example-4.png)

Also add a `Level` column in `tbl01`:

```sql
ALTER TABLE `tbl01` ADD COLUMN `Level` INT;
```

![optimistic-ddl-example-5](/media/optimistic-ddl-example-5.png)

At this time, the downstream already have had the same `Level` column, so DM-master performs no operation after comparing the table schemas.

Drop a `Name` column in `tbl01`:

```sql
ALTER TABLE `tbl01` DROP COLUMN `Name`;
```

![optimistic-ddl-example-6](/media/optimistic-ddl-example-6.png)

Then the downstream will receive the DML statements from `tbl00` and `tbl02` with the `Name` column, so this column is not immediately dropped.

In the same way, all DML statements can still be replicated to the downstream:

```sql
INSERT INTO `tbl01` (`ID`, `Level`) VALUES (15, 7);
UPDATE `tbl00` SET `Level` = 5 WHERE `ID` = 5;
```

![optimistic-ddl-example-7](/media/optimistic-ddl-example-7.png)

Add a `Level` column in `tbl02`:

```sql
ALTER TABLE `tbl02` ADD COLUMN `Level` INT;
```

![optimistic-ddl-example-8](/media/optimistic-ddl-example-8.png)

By then, all sharded tables have the `Level` column.

> Drop the `Name` column in `tbl00` and `tbl02` respectively:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Drop the `Name` columns in `tbl00` and `tbl02` respectively:
```

```sql
ALTER TABLE `tbl00` DROP COLUMN `Name`;
ALTER TABLE `tbl02` DROP COLUMN `Name`;
```

![optimistic-ddl-example-9](/media/optimistic-ddl-example-9.png)

> By then, the `Name` column is dropped from all sharded tables and can be safely dropped in the downstream:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By then, the `Name` columns are dropped from all sharded tables and can be safely dropped in the downstream:
```
